Dear Computer Science, Mathematics, and Science Major,

Have you started making plans for the coming summer?  Do you have a summer job “all lined up”?  Would you like to be involved in cutting edge research AND get paid to do it?  If your answer is ‘YES’, then continue reading!

The Departments of Biological & Environmental Sciences, Chemistry & Physics, and Mathematics & Computer Science invite continuing Longwood undergraduates to apply to participle in LU-PRISM (Longwood University Perspectives on Research In Science & Mathematics), our research program during the summer of 2013. This program combines practical training in specific research techniques with activities designed to put the research into the context of larger goals of modern science, technology, and mathematics. The titles and areas of the research projects available are summarized below.

Project Title
Specialty (Faculty – Department)
The creation and characterization of chimeric antigen receptors targeting the PD-1 receptor
Immunology
(Barber – BES)
Development of a modular expression vector system that can shuttle between budding yeast species
Molecular Biology/Genetics
(Beach – BES)
The effect of a Jupiter-like planet on small Earth-like planets
Astrophysics
(Dunning – CHEM/PHYS)
An investigation of the effect of biodiversity on the storage of organic carbon in the sediments of small ponds
Environmental Science
(Fortino – BES)
Pup recognition in the rat (Rattus norvegicus)
Behavioral Neuroscience
(Franssen – BES)
Designing luminescent lanthanide sensors for capsaicinoids
Synthetic Chemistry
(Gulgas – CHEM/PHYS)
Distribution of galactic dark matter temporarily captured into solar orbit
Astrophysics
(Page – CHEM/PHYS)
The development of chromatographic methods for the identification of smokeless gun powders and gunshot residues
Forensic Chemistry
(Porter – CHEM/PHYS)
Investigations in tornado alley: How humans interact with severe storms and an analysis in severe weather climatology
Climatology
(Scheitlin – BES)
Engaging in action research to inform mathematics instruction in a university precalculus course
Mathematics Education
(Shilling-Traina – MATH)
Studying the geometry of the Heisenberg space Nil3 using the Fels-Olver approach to moving frames
Mathematics
(Wears – MATH)
A determination of the short-term and long-term effects that specific agricultural contaminants have on aquatic life
Developmental Biology
(Znosko – BES)
 

This program is eight weeks long and will run from May 6, 2013 until June 28, 2013. During this time, participants will receive a stipend of $3500! In addition, the program will pay dormitory and meal plan fees.  Students not requiring on-campus housing will receive an additional stipend to cover their living expenses.

Students who apply to the program must be continuing Longwood undergraduates (cannot have graduated prior to December 2013) and be US citizens or permanent residents. Completed applications, including unofficial transcripts and one page narrative statement, are due no later than February 1, 2013. A printed copy of the completed application should be sent/delivered to Mrs. Linda Overstreet, Chichester 102 (the Science office).  Application materials may be obtained by contacting the Program Director, Dr. Melissa Rhoten (rhotenmc@longwood.edu).

Only 12 students will be chosen to participate in this program.  Undergraduate scholarly research is one of the most important things that you can do to distinguish yourself from other students applying to graduate schools, professional schools, and post-baccalaureate employment.  Don’t let this opportunity pass you by!  Get the applications materials and apply today!!

Sincerely,

Dr. Rhoten, LU-PRISM Director

Melissa Rhoten, Ph.D.
Professor of Chemistry
Department of Chemistry & Physics
Longwood University
201 High Street
Farmville, VA 23909
434-395-2636
rhotenmc@longwood.edu

