Hey man,
Sorry for the slow reply.  WE're in the process of moving the museum, which is proving to be an even huger endeavor than anticipated.

As for ID'ing midges, I use Epler almost exlusively.   Here's the website for his manual, which is pretty exhaustive (and also includes some really good beetle keys as well)... http://home.comcast.net/~johnepler3/index.html  He goes over the basic techniques in that manual.

I usually mount head capsules for the first couple samples of a creek until I feel I have a handle on what's there and to get a reference collection, then try to link up whole-organism ID's to those mounts in subsequent samples.  I don't mount everything after those first couple, just weirdos and questionable ones.  I put the animal belly-up on a slide with a drop of CMC or PVA.  I can never remember which is which, but one of those media is more viscous than the other.  You may want to get a bottle of each and see which is your preference.  Once it is on there in the media, I squash the head and let it dry. The positioning and squashing takes a bit of practice, so iron out the kinks on large abundant taxa.   You can often "maneuver" the animal under the slide by using the eraser of a pencil to apply directed pressure.  The idea is to get the ventral part of the head flat and facing up.  Once you're good, you can put a couple few midges under one cover slip.  It's sometimes good to get a few under there at v
otations as you'll never see all of the key characters from just one mount.  As for drying, 24 hours in a drying oven works great, but you can also let the things sit on the benchtop.  Then I examine under a compound scope.   Having phase contrast is really helpful, but not always necessary.  Also, word of advice, make sure to label your slides really well as to the site, date, and ID.  You will inevitably be going back to the slides you make, so having that info is critical.  Hope this helps, feel free to call if you have problems as you progress.


Good luck!!

Looking forward to SFS!

-B
